Now let's look at casting of objects.
And after discussing casting, we will also look at a new operator called Instance of.
We look at typecasting during our discussion on primitive variables.
It allowed us to assign primitive variables or literals of one type to variables of another type.
And we discussed both implicit as well as explicit casting.
Implicit casting is done when something smaller is assigned to a larger variable.
An explicit casting is needed when something larger is assigned to a smaller variable.
Just recall that typecasting was applicable only if both data types or of numeric types.
That is any data type other than boolean.
So typecasting was needed as one primitive variable or literal could be assigned to another primitive
variable.
And we saw that with polymorphism, we can now assign variables of one class to variables of another
class.
And we also need casting here.
Now we looked at this example when introducing polymorphism.
In fact, it is a very definition of polymorphism.
Due to polymorphism, we are able to pass a subclass object as argument to the method parameter which
is of type superclass.
So basically what we are seeing here is implicit casting in action.
That is a subclass object is implicitly casted to a superclass variable.
But once implicit casting is done, we can only invoke those subclass methods which are also defined
in the superclass.
That is, we cannot invoke any methods that are specific to subclass.
We discussed it when introducing polymorphism and here is an example.
First, implicit cast is done to assign a data object to a variable of type stuff.
We know that Ed is a subtype of stuff.
Once this is done, we can no longer invoke any methods that are specific to Ed.
And we know that this is because compiler uses reference type to decide on whether a method can be invoked
or not.
So here we get compiler error as the reference type staff does not have a pro review method.
And to address this, we need to insert ed as an explicit cast as shown here.
Now we are promising compiler that at runtime the variable s will be referencing an ed object or one
of its subclasses.
Also note that to invoke the method we need two pairs of parentheses, one with the cast itself and
the other around the cast and the variable.
Now this example is same as the previous one, but it is expressed in a more realistic way.
Here the method approved review has staff as input parameter and it in turn invokes the approval review
method on the input staff object, which we know gives a compiler error.
And to avoid this, we insert ed as an explicit cast.
So as mentioned earlier, by inserting this cast, we are promising the compiler that at runtime the
variable s will be referencing an ED object.
No say if this method is invoked with a staff object.
That is, we are breaking the promise we made to the compiler.
Now with this, we get an error at runtime and this error is called as class cast exception.
That is, the input object cannot be casted to the specified class.
That is, in this case, the staff object cannot be casted to editor.
This is because staff can be an editor, but it can be something else too.
For instance, it can be an email admin too.
So while editor is a staff, a staff need not be editor.
And so we get this error at runtime.
Now, one thing we can do to avoid this runtime error is to do a logical test before doing the cast.
And for that, we could use something called an instance of operator.
And here is the syntax.
On the left, you have an object reference.
And on the right, we have the name of the class instance of operator would return a true if the object
referenced by the object reference on the left is indeed an instance of the class on the right.
Not that it is the object references object type, not the reference type is what matters.
So just take that in mind.
Also the object referenced by the variable can be a subclass of the class specified on the right side,
so it doesn't have to be a direct instance.
Now let's look at some instance of examples.
Let's consider these three declarations.
First, on second, instantiate user and staff classes, while the third one creates an instance of
staff.
But the reference type is user.
And this example is related to the first declaration since the variable use object type is user.
It is an instance of user and hence it true is returned in this case.
This expression returns a false as use object type is a user, which is not an instance of staff.
And we know that staff is a subtype of user.
And this is related to the second declaration here, object type of variable as a staff.
And so this evaluates to true.
And this would also evaluate to true as SS referencing a staff object and staff is a subtype of user.
So as we mentioned earlier, the object reference can be a subclass of the class on the right side of
the instance of operator.
Like in the previous example.
This also evaluates to true as the variable.
US in the third declaration is referencing staff object type, which is a subclass of user.
And the final example also evaluates to true as it is, the object type that matters.
And here is a new approved review method which prevents the potential runtime error a test of the input
variable as is an instance of ed, and only if the test succeeds.
It applies the cast and invokes the approve review method.
So we cannot use these kinds of invocation statements.
The test fails for the first invocation where a staff object is being passed as argument.
And so the runtime error is prevented.
But the test succeeds for both the second and even the third invocation, where chief editor object
is passed.
And we know that Chief Ed is a subtype of Ed.
Now let's go ahead and look at all of the stuff we learned in code.
This is the approved review method and it has been added to the user test class which has been created
in the previous demo.
And here is the final logic that we have seen in the slide.
But I'm going to start with demonstrating from the beginning the concepts that we have started learning
from the beginning of the lesson.
So initially we were invoking the approve review method.
So the input variable to this method is staff.
And we were invoking approve review and it gave us a compilation error because the compiler knows that
approved review method is not in the staff class.
So we said that compiler looks at the reference variable, not the object type, but the reference variable.
And in this case the reference variable is staff and it doesn't have the approve review method.
So we get a compiler error.
When I hover over here, it says the method of review is undefined.
So let me just comment this out.
And the solution was to insert a cast.
And so here we are applying this cast.
We are inserting this editor as a cast and now it works.
So we don't see the compilation error.
So let's just run this.
So we are invoking we have created an instance of the user test class and we are invoking the approve
review method, but we are invoking with by passing staff object as an method argument.
So this would give us a runtime error.
So when I run this as we discussed, it is throwing a class cast exception.
So that's the runtime error that we are getting here.
So it's no longer it's not a compilation error, but it's a runtime error and it says that the error
is happening at line 11.
So this is where the cast is being applied.
And we were passing a staff object instead of passing an editor object or one of its subtypes, we promised
the compiler that we would be passing either an editor object or one of its subtypes, and we did not
do that.
And so we are getting this runtime error.
So now to avoid this, we said we can use instance of operator and we did that and this is the logic.
So let me just uncomment this code.
So here we are applying the instance of operator and if it is really an instance of Ed or one of its
subclasses, then we would invoke this method.
We would apply the cast and invoke this.
Otherwise we would simply print this statement.
Invalid object passed.
So now if we invoke this, it says Invalid object passed when we are passing staff.
So let me comment this and let me pass an ED object.
So when I run this, it says Ed approve review.
So it's actually invoking the approve review method in ED class.
So.
So it is going here and it is invoking the approved review method and the editor class.
So approve review and it is going to print this text.
So that's about it.